4 ContributorsRituals and Power Lyrics                                         Rituals and Power

                                            S. R. F. PRICE
       Because mankind address him thus as Sebastos in accordance with their estimation of his honor, they revere him with temples and sacrifices over Islands and continents, organized in cities and provinces, matching the greatness of his virtue and repaying his benefactions towards them.1

      The cults of the Roman emperor performed by the Greek cities of Asia Minor during the first three centuries C.E. confound our expectations about the relationship between religion, politics and power. The civilized, complex cities, with their ideals of autonomy and freedom had to accept subjection to an authority which, while not so alien as to make adjustment impossible, was external to the traditional structures of the city. The answer to the problem lay in finding a place for the ruler within the framework of traditional cults of: the gods.

     These imperial cults have a particular importance for those interested in the formation of large-scale societies. Much royal ritual coronations, court ceremonial and funerals - is located in and created by the enter. In many kingdoms there is little representation of the monarch outside the center, except in royal progresses, which are occasional and transient. In Asia Minor there were ceremonies to greet emperors who visited provincial cities, but they were rarely called for; no emperor visited the area m the whole of the first century C.E. The rituals with which we are concerned are not irregular and passing events, but cults performed for the emperor in his absence and institutionalized on a regular basis. The Roman Empire thus offers an excellent opportunity to explore a ruler cult which was a permanent institution, created and organized by the subjects of a great empire in order to represent to themselves the ruling power.

      Because of the size of the Roman Empire, which stretched from Spain to Syria and from Britain to North Africa, I propose to focus on one area, namely Asia Minor, which is roughly equivalent to modern Turkey. Here the basic unit of political organization was the city, and the dominant language Greek, but the cities were always at the mercy of external power. Both Persia and Athens had exercised sway over them, and from the time of Alexander the Great (336-323 B.C.E.) onwards the cities had gradually lost their independence, first to Greek kings and then to Rome. The reign of the first emperor Augustus (31 B.C.E.-14 C.E.) marked a turning point in the consolidation of Roman power. Asia Minor consisted of several provinces, each administered by a governor who came out from Rome. With only a small staff, the governor himself could do little more than handle important legal cases and maintain order. The cities continued to organize themselves, and they, rather than Rome, were the primary centers of attachment for their inhabitants.

      We must avoid the difficulties which derive from our own cultural background; Christianizing assumptions and categories have proved a major stumbling block in interpretations of the imperial cult, and of these the most pervasive is our assumption that politics and religion are separate areas; we need also to reject an ethnocentric prejudice for the Romans against the Greeks.

      Travelers in the empire would not have been surprised to meet the cult wherever they went: they would have found the cult located both in  local communities and in the associations formed of these communities in particular Roman provinces. The actual forms which the cult took varied from place to place. For example, the city of Eresus on the island of Lesbos recorded on an inscription the munificence of a local citizen towards the imperial family in the later years of Augustus's reign and the early years of his successor, Tiberius (Catalogue no. 5).

      In the magistracy of Gaius Caesar, son of Augustus, leader of the youth, he sacrificed again at [the festivals of] the Nedameia and Sebasta and offered sweet-meats to the citizens and Romans and foreigners. In the magistracy of Apollonodotus,  when news came of the safety and victory of Augustus he sacrificed at the good news [gospel] to all the gods and goddesses and feasted at the sacrifice the citizens, the Romans and the foreigners and gave to those mentioned a bottle of wine and three pounds of bread. He also dedicated to the sons of Augustus a sanctuary and temple from his own money in the most prominent part of the square, on which_ his name was also inscribed, wanting to show his gratitude and piety to the whole imperial house .... He also founded at the harbor of the market a temple to Augustus god Caesar, so that no notable place should lack his goodwill and piety to the god namely, Augustus.

      This text vividly evokes the range of imperial rituals celebrated in the cities of the empire. The rule of Rome was represented in marble. But the widespread imperial temples and imperial statues did not form the cold grandeur of an alien authority. The visual expression of the emperor was incorporated into the regular life of the communities through public celebrations. Long established festivals, such as the Nedameia, had an imperial element added to them; they were now also called Sebasta. Separate imperial festivals were also founded, where sacrifices were offered and the whole community was involved either in processions or as the recipients of donations from members of the elite, often acting as imperial priests. The honors, temples, priests, festivals, and sacrifices were curiously close to the honors given to the, traditional gods. Indeed these honors were designed to display quite explicitly “goodwill and piety to the god,”

      The sources available for the study of the imperial cult in Asia Minor are rich. Many imperial temples are known. Numerous statues of the emperor survive, some actually discovered in temples, while others are again shown on coins. But their value is limited in comparison with the evidence surviving in thousands of texts inscribed on stone. These texts make it possible to reconstruct what was supposed to happen at particular imperial festivals. They also provide explicit and unforced uses of the conceptual framework of the cults. For example, the various formulae used to describe imperial sacrifices allow us to create a picture of the relationship between the emperor and the gods; the terms in which activities of the local notables are described and praised are important evidence for the overall purpose of the cults; quite explicit reasons are also provided in some documents concerning the establishment of the cults.

                                      Interpretation of Ritual

      Royal rituals have long held the attention of historians of other societies, who have written, for example, on the royal touch or on mediaeval European royal insignia. 2 The reason for these studies is that royal rituals and insignia are seen to define the nature of the king and hence of the state itself. I wish to develop the idea that imperial rituals too were a way of conceptualizing the world. I do not see rituals merely as a series of “honors” addressed to the emperor but as a system whose structure defines the position of the emperor. Clifford Geertz argues that complexes of symbols, embedded in ritual and lying outside the individual in "the intersubjective world of common understandings," shape the world by inducing in the individual a certain distinctive set of dispositions which result in actions. "The merit of this sort of view of what are usually called 'mental traits' or, if the Cartesianism is unavowed, 'psychological forces' is that it gets them out of any dim and inaccessible realm of private sensation into that same well-lit world of observables" where investigation is possible. 3 The interpretation of ritual as a cognitive system, which has proved fruitful for anthropologists, will, I hope, help to shed new light on the imperial cult.

      To treat ritual as a public cognitive system is to shift the perspective of inquiry away from that traditionally adopted. The conventional approach in ancient history attempts to locate meaning at the level of individuals and their mental states. Thus scholars have often searched the imperial cult for evidence of real feelings or emotions towards the emperor. The problem with emotion as the criterion of the significance of rituals is not just that in practice we do not have the relevant evidence but that it is covertly Christianizing. That is to apply the standards of one religion to the ritual of another society without consideration of their relevance to indigenous standards.
      The appeal to emotion as a criterion is closely related to another common approach to ritual. One might imagine that although analysis of symbolic knowledge was interesting so far as it went, the important question remained: what did the Greeks really believe about the relationship between the emperor and the gods? That is, the beliefs of individual Greeks are appealed to as a more solid or "real" level than that of symbolism. I would like to suggest that such an appeal is deeply misguided for two related reasons. Firstly, the status of these "real beliefs" can only be private and mental, but fundamental objections have been made to the theory of belief as a private and mental action, from various directions. Indeed the centrality of "religious belief" in our culture has sometimes led to the feeling that belief is a distinct and natural capacity which is shared by all human beings. This, of course, is nonsense. The question about the "real beliefs" of the Greeks is again implicitly Christianizing.

      The second reason for objecting to the question is that it lays an improper emphasis on the individual, which is part of the more general issue of the status of the individual in historical explanation. Many ancient historians, relying (often unwittingly) on a realist epistemology, assume that society is essentially an aggregate of individuals and that explanations of societies have to be couched ultimately in terms of individuals. 4, Methodological individualists can study only the organization of ritual by the elite or by individual members of the elite and the political exploitation of royal ritual for propaganda purposes. That is, they draw a sharp distinction between symbolism and the "real" world of individuals and they cannot treat ritual as an articulation of collective representations. 5 But from Durkheim onwards insistence on the social as the primary area of analysis has been a commonplace in anthropology and now also in modern history. 6 In particular, language is emphasized as the central phenomenon. Language is not a window onto the real world but is, rather, the stuff of thought itself. Individuals are born into a society which already contains sets of institutions, practices and a common language, from which individuals construct the world and themselves. Thus with the imperial cult the processions and the sacrifices, the temples and the images fill our sources. They are the crucially important collective constructs to which the individual reacted. Ritual is what there was.

                                         Religion and Politics

      From the theologian Origen in the third century through into the eighth and ninth-century debates on the role of religious images a distinction was drawn between religious and secular honors.  7 In modern times the preoccupation with this distinction is pervasive. Most scholars agree that the imperial cult was only superficially a religious phenomenon. It was "fundamentally a secular institution," 8"more a matter of practical politics than of religion. " 9 The conventional formula is that the imperial cult was simply an expression of political loyalty. 10 In Nock's classic dictum, the cult was homage not worship. 11 The distinction must be convicted of perpetuating a Christian debate.

      The reasons given for the location of the imperial cult in the domain of politics are two-fold. The first is that the cult was manipulated by the state, an argument that is particularly common in work on the Western provinces. "Like all religious constructions of politicians, [the imperial cult] had a weakness, for it lacked all genuine religious content." 12 But of course, central promotion does not necessarily imply cynical manipulation. 13  The second reason applies to other parts of the empire, where the initiatives came from below. A study of the imperial cult in the Greek world concludes that the cult discloses "little about the religious life of the Hellenic peoples but much about their ways of diplomacy." 14 . The imperial cult is thus essentially a political phenomenon, either because it was exploited by the Roman state, or because the subjects made diplomatic capital out of it. But both arguments assume that an examination of overt initiatives and of the interests served by the cult exhausts the significance of the phenomenon. This is clearly not the case.

      To follow the conventional distinction between religion and politics privileges the view of an observer over that of Greeks and makes it impossible to understand the dynamics of the imperial cult.

                                    Historical Development

      Ruler cult shows a decisive change with Augustus.15 The assembly of the province of Asia decided in about 29 B.C.E. to offer a crown "for the person who devised the greatest honors for the god" (namely, Augustus). 16  When the crown was finally awarded in 9 B.C.E. the assembly explained the reasons for its desire to honor Augustus.

      Whereas the providence which divinely ordered our lives created with zeal and munificence the most perfect good for our lives by producing Augustus and filling him with virtue for the benefaction of mankind, sending us and those after us a savior who put an end to war and established all things; and whereas Caesar [Augustus] when he appeared exceeded the hopes of all who had anticipated good tidings, not only by surpassing the benefactors born before him, but not even leaving those to come any hope of surpassing him; and whereas the birthday of the god marked for the world the beginning of good tidings through his coming ... 17
      The actual proposal, to start the new year on Augustus's birthday, was made by the Roman governor, who expressed similar sentiments about the crucial importance of the birth of Augustus.

       (It is hard to tell) whether the birthday of the most divine Caesar is a matter of greater pleasure or benefit. We could justly hold it to be equivalent to the beginning of all things, and he has restored at least to serviceability, if not to 'its natural state, every form that had become imperfect and fallen into misfortune; and he has given a different aspect to the whole world, which blithely would have embraced its own destruction if Caesar had not been born for the common benefit of all. Therefore people would be right to consider this to have been the beginning of the breath of life for them, which has set a limit to regrets for having been born. And since no one could receive more auspicious beginnings for the common and individual good from any other day than this day which has been fortunate for all ... ; and since 'it is difficult to render thanks in due measure for his great benefactions unless in each case we should devise some new method of repayment, but people would celebrate with greater pleasure his birthday as a day common to all if some 'special pleasure has come to them through his rule; therefore it seems proper to me that the birthday of the most divine Caesar shall serve as the same New Year's Day for all citizens .... 18

      The expression of gratitude and enthusiasm found in this document is characteristic of the Augustan period. In its emphasis on the importance of repaying the debts of benefactions the imperial cult was at one with Hellenistic ruler cults, but the language of the Augustan decree has no parallel in the earlier ruler cults of this area. The exaltation of Augustus is earned even further in a lengthy, but poorly preserved, Coan decree which starts “Since Emperor Caesar, son of god, god Sebastos has by his benefactions to all men outdone even the Olympian gods. . .” 19 Similarly a decree from Mytilene speaks of gratitude for his benefactions and continues:

      that he should ponder upon his own self-esteem because it is _never possible to match those honors which are insignificant both m accidence and in essence to those who have attained heavenly glory and possess the eminence and power of gods. But if anything more glorious than these provisions is found hereafter the enthusiasm and piety of the city will not fail in anything that can further deify him. 20

       In contrast to the decrees of  Hellenistic royal cult which simply, as with Antiochos III and Teos, describe the political benefactions of the king, the Augustan decrees make explicit and elaborate comparisons between  actions of the emperor and those of the gods. The gods had long been described as benefactors and Augustus could, in a rhetorical manner, even be praised to their disadvantage.
      These explicit comparisons between gods and emperor are the product of a change in the dynamics of the cult. Whereas the Hellenistic royal cults were the product of specific royal interventions in the city, Augustan cult were no longer tied to such interventions. The assembly of the province of Asia was simply reacting to the very existence of Augustus and his general activities rather than requiting him for any specific benefactions. Consequently the decision that Augustus’ birthday should be the start of the new year was operative not for one city but for the whole of the province of Asia. Along with this change in dynamics went the description of Augustus as a benefactor of the whole world. The feeling that imperial rule provided a canopy for all people is also reflected in the organization of the cults. In contrast again to the Hellenistic period, when, with rare exceptions, royal cults were city cults, the Roman period saw not only a great flowering of city cults but also prestigious cults organized by the provincial assemblies. These assemblies, which were themselves to some extent the product of Roman rule, had the important task of representing local interests to Rome; they also held regular imperial festivals presided over by the high priest of the assembly. For example, the province of Asia in 29 B.C.E. established, by leave of Augustus, a cult of Roma and Augustus with a temple at Pergamum, where a regular festival was celebrated.

      This greater consolidation of cults in the imperial period is part of a more extensive change in the relationship between the honors and the ruler. The replacement of piecemeal and isolated cults by a new density and organization of cults helped to strengthen the idea that the cults themselves had real constitutive power. In the third century B.C.E., even though "divine honors" were granted to rulers, no explicit statement was made about their status. But in the course of the second century B.C.E. the latent ideas were elaborated and there developed the idea that the giving of honors deified a person. The culmination of this trend can be seen in the decree from Mytilene which not only awarded Augustus some of the mostly explicitly divine honors found anywhere, but also stated that these would deify him, while leaving open the possibility of extra divine honors at a later date. In consequence the system of honors had considerable importance in conceptualizing the political actions of the emperor.

                                              Local Roots

      The reasons for the long-term vitality of this fluid and elaborate system of cults lie in its capaciry to exploit the competitive values of the urban elite. Within the framework collective decision making by the council and people, 21 there was naturally room for initiatives by prominent individuals. Under a regular procedure, a wealthy individual could give the city a sum of money for the purpose of cult which formed a special fund administered by the city. For example, at Chios an imperial festival, the Caesarea, was celebrated every four years on the income from one soch gift. 22 The income was administered by eight officials, elected immediately after the organizer of the imperial games, according to strictly defined rules. The donor himself seems to have been assured of continuing prestige by the inclusion of his descendants in the procession at the festival. Cities also invited individuals to contribute to the cost of building imperial temples. 23 Individual initiatives and resources were thereby incorporated into the service of the city.

      Imperial priest played an important role in fostering a dynamic element in the cult. They came from the local elite and were generally among the most prominent figures in the city, 24  a status recognized by their privileged position in the assembly, 25 and as eponymous officials.26 Like priests of traditional cults they were not specialists and the duration of their period of office varied. While some periods were quite short, there are numerous cases' of priesthoods being held for life, 27 or even, occasionally, inherited within one family. 28 An Ephesian family actually succeeded in maintaining an inherited priesthood over five generations. 29 Lengthy tenure of office obviously helped to maintain the existence of individual cults and was thus an element favoring stability in the system, but it is not to be taken as evidence for ossification. Life-long or hereditary priesthoods could actually arise from extreme competition when one person or family succeeded in performing an extraordinary act of generosity, temporarily outstripping other members of the elite. Thus a citizen of Megalopolis in the Peloponnese, during the reign of Augustus, promised to rebuild a temple of "The Mistress" which was in disrepair, and actually built a temple of the, emperors and repaired another temple, in addition to other services in the city. In response the city put up images of him in various temples, erected honorific inscriptions at the temples and made him hereditary high priest of the emperors for life. 30 But even in such circumstances this was not the end of the matter; other members of the elite could always respond with further acts of liberality.

      While these rivalries within the elite and pressures of the cities on their elites operated within the confines of individual cities, there were also major pressures between cities. The cities were very jealous of their status and titles, and the imperial cult was absorbed into their competitiveness, whose scope it greatly increased. 31 With civic cults the pressures could operate only at the level of very conscious advertisement of their cults, either by the erection of inscriptions in appropriate places or by the invitation of participants to their festivals. With the provincial cults the rivalry between cities was almost unbounded. The decision as to which city should be the site for an imperial temple, and hence for a regular imperial festival, naturally involved the elaborate ranking of the claims of individual cities.

                                         Festivals and Cities

      Imperial festivals, despite their failure to conform to our expectations of piety, formed the essential framework of the imperial cult. It was at festivals and in their ritual that the vague and elusive ideas concerning the emperor, the “collative representations” were focused in action and made powerful. "It is in some sort of ceremonial form ... that the moods and motivations which sacred symbols induce in men and the general conceptions of the order of existence which they formulate for men meet and reinforce one another. "32 Here the conceptual systems of temple, image and sacrifice (see Price, Rituals and Power, chaps. 6-8) had their living embodiment.

      The city as a whole was involved in establishing and running the imperial cult. Cults were generally the product of a joint decision of both the council and the people, whatever the significance of individuals in providing the initial impetus.

      Imperial celebrations were organized both irregularly and regularly. The accession of a new emperor or the receipt of good news about the emperor in the course of his reign were met with rejoicings (see Price, Rituals and Power, 212-14). Indeed this became so common that a governor of Asia was moved to check the abuses to which the practice led.

      For as often as more cheerful news comes in from Rome, people use this for their own private gain, and, making the outward form of the imperial house a cover, they sell the priesthoods, as if at public auction, and invite men of any type to purchase them. 33

       There was also a regular cycle of celebrations. One way in which the emperor was brought into the life of the community was by adapting a traditional festival in honor of the chief local deity. The emperor was often brought into close relationship with the traditional gods of the city, in joint dedications, in assimilations and in identifications. 34 In particular, traditional festivals often had an imperial title added to them; the Heraea of Samas, for example, became the Sebasta Heraea. The significance of such double titles is at first sight unclear. Some are very transient35 and do not necessarily entail a close relationship between the emperor and the traditional cult; 36 others refer to two distinct festivals celebrated at the same time, 37 but double titles usually referred to one festival38 and represented genuinely joint cults which showed piety to both god and emperor. 39 A foundation at Ephesus gives an idea of the way that the emperor was added to the traditional cult of Artemis. 40 Images of Artemis and busts of the imperial family and various personifications were provided for carrying from the temple of Artemis, where they were kept, to the theater. Here they were put on special bases at various occasions: the new moon sacrifice of the high priestly year, the regular meetings of the assembly, and the festivals of the Sebasta, the Soteria and the quadrennial Great Ephesia.

      There were also regular festivals in honor of the emperor alone. The most prominent of these are the major imperial festivals with their associated competitions in athletics or music. The names for these vary, but Sebasteia, Caesarea, Hadrianea, Antoninea and Severeia are particularly common. These civic festivals were generally held once every four years, 41 though a two-year cycle is also found. 42 Provincial festivals and games in Asia were also based on a regular cycle, but the picture is complicated by the number of different cities which celebrated provincial games. 43
      Annual celebrations were regular too in cities, even if there the special celebrations with games were held only every four years. Mytilene, for example, held competitions with prizes every four years, and also annual sacrifices in the temples of Zeus and Augustus; these annual celebrations were often held on the emperor's birthday. 44 There were also in some places more frequent celebrations. Mytilene actually decided also to sacrifice on the birthday of Augustus each month, in accordance with Hellenistic practice. 45 These days, on which distributions and feasts were given by rich benefactors of the city, were known collectively as "the imperial days. " 46

      While a special event, such as the arrival of the emperor, could be commemorated by the designation of the day as sacred, 47  it is the regularity of the standard imperial festivals that reflects the Greek perception of the permanence and stability of the Roman empire. The importance of these regular imperial festivals is summed up in a decree of the Asian assembly:

      Since one should each year make clear display of one's piety and of all holy, fitting intentions towards the imperial house, the choir of all Asia, gathering at Pergamum on the most holy birthday of Sebastos Tiberius Caesar god, performs a task that contributes greatly to the glory of Sebastos in hymning the imperial house and performing sacrifices to the Sebastan gods and conducting festivals and feasts .... 48

      Festival followed festival in a predictable manner, with but minor adjustments for the play of events and the passage of emperors.

      Indeed time itself was changed by the imperial cult. The years were distinguished in some cities no longer by the holders of the old magistracies but by the names of the annual imperial priests (Price, Rituals and Power, 63). Within the year time was divided by months, some of which acquired imperial names such "Kaisarios" or "Tiberios," perhaps to mark the celebration of an imperial festival. 49 A more radical change was the transformation of the calendar of the province of Asia under Augustus (Price, Rituals and Power, 54-5). The old luni-solar Macedonian calendar was replaced by a more convenient calendar based on the new Julian system, but the motivation for the change was not so much efficiency as to provide a way of honoring Augustus. Whereas the old year had begun at a point determined by the sun, the autumnal equinox, the new calendar was to commence on Augustus's birthday, September 23, which "we could justly hold to be equivalent to the beginning of all things." There was also a variety of local, civic calendars operating in the province of Asia, sometimes based on a lunar cycle; some       continued, but many were replaced by a calendar beginning on Augustus's birthday. 50 There is a natural tendency for people to conceive of the calendar not as arbitrary divisions of a continuum, but as actually regulating time itself.

      The festivals were not just passing ceremonies but sometimes lasted for several days. The festival at Gytheum lasted for six days with each day designated in honor of a different member of the imperial house, and with two additional days in honor of two distinguished Spartans. The gladiatorial displays, which often formed part of the festivals, ranged in length from two to thirteen days, with an exceptional fifty-one days on one occasion. 51

      At the festivals the towns would be crowded, perhaps with visitors from neighboring villages, perhaps from further afield. Dio of Prusa, in a speech addressed to Apa'mea Celaenae (XXXV 15) gives some idea of the hustle and bustle in a center used by the• Roman governor for his annual assizes, which

      bring together a huge throng of people, litigants, jurors, orators, governors, attendants, slaves, pimps, muleteers, tinkers, prostitutes. and craftsmen. Consequently those who have goods to sell get the highest price• and there is no lack of work in the city, either for the transport, or houses or women.
      Dio,is consoling Apamea Celaenae for being only an assize center and not a center for the provincial imperial cult. Even greater numbers gathered at provincial festivals. Provincial delegates mingled with traders who were attracted from Asia and other parts of the Mediterranean by the tax exemptions granted to some of the major imperial festivals. 52 The number of visitors made it an expensive and prestigious task to care for them. It was a mark of special pride for a man to have been responsible at his own expense for all six gymnasia at Pergamum during a provincial festival. 53 The control of the proceedings was the duty of a special official, the panegyriarch, who is found at both local and provincial festivals, 54  and it was sometimes even necessary for there to be attendants with whips or staves to keep order. 55  Imperial festivals were certainly not casual, half-hearted affairs. Some celebrations were attached to festivals of local deities; others were carefully organized on a regular  basis; they lasted a significant period of time and at the provincial festivals the city would  be thronged with visitors . The imperial cult was clearly part of the life of the city.

                            The Transformation of Civic Space

      Space is an important subject, not as a Kantian universal category but because of the significance of the way that it was structured by the Greeks. As anthropologists have long been aware, the ordering of space can be seen both as a representation of social ideas and as a part of the fabric reality. 56 Political and social changes are likely  to consist in part  in the reordering  of space. For example, the transformation of Athenian political and social organization in the late sixth and first half of the fifth centuries B.C.E. was accompanied by important changes in the organization of civic space of the main square. 57 There were comparable changes in the Greek city in the imperial period.

      Imperial temples and sanctuaries were generally located in the most prominent and prestigious positions available within the city. 58 Like Greek sanctuaries in general, imperial sanctuaries could be found scattered throughout the city. In small cities, when there was room, the temples were often placed in the civic center. The imperial temple at Sidyma was in the center (Cat. no. 78), while at Cestrus two imperial temples face each other across the main square (Cat. nos. 146-47). A range of other important locations are also found: facing the city gate (Cat. no. 150, Laertes), at one end of the main civic area (Cat. no. 129, Sagalassus), or on a terrace over the theater (Cat. no. 73, Stratonicea).
      The larger cities were able to place their imperial temples in preeminent positions. At Aphrodisias, where the imperial temple was a local landmark, excavations have revealed two facing porticoes of the first century C.E., three stories high, 14 meters apart and 60 meters long (Cat. no. 64). One was adorned with scenes of Republican and Augustan military conquests, the other with panels illustrating mythological figures relating in part to the foundation of Aphrodisias and the imperial family. The porticoes seem to form a monumental processional way, leading to the actual imperial temple. At Miletus there was a temple of Augustus, though its location is not known (Cat. no. 38), and in the center of the courtyard of the council house was built in the Augustan period a large and magnificent imperial altar (Cat. no. 39). One could not ask for a more vivid picture of the incorporation of the imperial cult within the institutions of the city.

      The impact on the civic space is, even more marked at Ephesus, perhaps the richest city of the province. There the whole upper square was redesigned during the reign of Augustus (Fig. 1). Just between the prytaneum (A), the magistrate's building which contained the sacred hearth of the city, and the council house (C) lie the remains of what has been identified as a pair of small imperial temples (B; Cat. no. 27). In front of these key civic buildings there was built in the latter part of Augustus's reign a "royal portico" (stoa basilike) dedicated to Artemis, Augustus and Tiberius (D); at one end of this there was a room containing over life-sized statues of Augustus and his wife Livia (E; Cat. no. 30). In the center of the square there is a free-standing temple which may be a temple of Augustus (F); a head of Augustus found in the area may have come from this temple, and an inscription refers to "the foundation of Augustus and the dedication of the sanctuary," probably in 27 B.C.E. (Cat. no. 29). Towards the end of the first century C.E. a further imperial temple, to Domitian, was built in the center of a huge precinct off one side of the same main square (G). This involved the construction of a platform, which was given a fine facade onto the main street; a contemporary civic decree refers to "the new grandeurs of the imperial works" which were matched by the renovation of old buildings. (Cat. no. 31). 59

      The impact of the emperor on the city is marked not only by temples and altars, but also by the provision of special imperial space in the porticoes on the main squares of the cities. 60  There is a tendency to assume that Greek porticoes were purely secular buildings, like shopping centers or bus  shelters, but they did in fact sometimes contain shrines and  could be used for cult purposes. 61  It was within this tradition that porticoes were built or adapted for the imperial cult.  A portico (stoa) and Sebasteion are mentioned together in one city, perhaps as a joint building (Cat. no. 74, Choma), and we have already noted the room in the portico at Ephesus. At Priene the Hellenistic sacred portico which ran along one side of the main square included a series of small rooms, in one of which was found a copy of the provincial decree changing the calendar of Asia.

INSERT PICTURES

      If the imperial cult was an attempt by the city to find a position for the ruler, it is perfectly fitting that the physical expression of this position should be within the civic space rather than in some separate area outside the city, Thus the sitting of the imperial temple at Ephesus between the prytaneum and the council house put a permanent expression of the emperor at the heart of the city. The aim of the strategy was to accommodate the rulers within  the old framework, and juxta-position of this sort or the use of a room in a portico on the main square or in the gymnasium was partially successful. But the desire to give the greatest possible prominence to the emperor meant that not all of the architecture of the imperial cult fitted within the limits of the traditional city.

      It is preferable to interpret the architectural changes positively as changes parallel to the gradual regularization and restriction of the freedom of action of the Greek city. The formalization of civic space would seem increasingly appropriate in a monarchical world. Within this overall architectural development of the Greek city was embedded the architecture of the imperial cult.

              Traditional Sanctuaries, Imperial Temples, and Shrines

      I have tried to show positively, and with different material, how the subordination of emperor to the god was expressed in architectural terms. There were special imperial buildings in sanctuaries, either freestanding or in porticoes, but these did not approach the temple of the god in grandeur or design. The emperor did sometimes have a part in the temple itself, but in a carefully controlled manner. His name was added in the dedication to the gods; he was sometimes actually allocated space at the front or rear of the temple. The pediment might even focus on the emperor in its dedication and decoration. Inside, however, the traditional god was not dethroned or threatened by the emperor. The imperial images that were placed inside the temple of the god seem to have been of different size and in a different position from the traditional cult statue. The limiting case is provided by the building of an entirely new temple to a traditional god and the emperor, which clearly permitted the relationship between god and emperor to be expressed without the constraints, of pre-existing architecture.

      Temples and shrines devoted solely to the emperor ranged widely. There were special rooms in porticoes and gymnasia; there were freestanding buildings in their own sanctuaries. These buildings varied from simple rectangular buildings filled with imperial statues to buildings with a porch or a colonnade. The most elaborate of them were large and ex-pensive buildings with columns all the way round, which were externally identical to a standard temple of the gods. 62

      The stress upon the dynastic nature of the empire is also found if one passes from the exterior of the temples and the iconography of altars and penetrates within the buildings of the imperial cult.

      The stability of imperial rule was perceived to lie in the transmission of power within the imperial family, and , in consequence, considerable importance was attached to the whole imperial house. Modern historians tend to lay too much emphasis on the emperor alone, ignoring the role of the imperial family. Some imperial women played an important part in public diplomatic activities, and not merely in the underhand intrigues of "I, Claudius." Thus the Ephesians tried to aid their claim for a fourth title of "temple warden" by petitioning Julia Domna, the mother of Caracalla, and her reply, tactfully evading any decision, was inscribed by them. 63  At Rome_and elsewhere honors were given to women and other members of the imperial family. In addition to the displays of statuary that we have already examined there is the very striking Antonine group from the Artemision at Ephesus. There were statues of Marcus Aurelius, his wife, his son Commodus and five daughters (Cat. no. 28). The empire was in the hands of a family.

                             The Imperial Cult and Political Power

                        What is a god? Wielding of power (to kratoun).
                        What is a king? Like a god (isotheos).

      Consider the implications of this pair of Greek apophthegms. What was the relationship of the imperial cult both to the religious and to the political systems of the Roman empire? Where was power to be found?

      We must consider the problem of the relationship between the imperial cult• and the political system, between the "dignified" and the "efficient" aspects of the state. The issue is all too often neglected by writers on royal rituals, who tend to stop with a description of the rituals themselves   fail to investigate the relationship between the sacred nature of the king and his political power. 65 In Roman history the conventional approach solves the problem by relegating the imperial cult to the sidelines, in favor of diplomacy and administration. Politics, diplomacy and administration form the key to any understanding of the period; the imperial cult does not. Rituals may indeed present a picture of the emperor between human and divine, but they do not really matter. I propose to argue against this view, but it is not easy to pose the question in the appropriate terms. I do not want to suggest that the imperial cult was a part of the ideological superstructure nor that it legitimated political power; these views presuppose too crude a view of the existence and relationship of different aspects of society, economics, politics and religion. Nor should power be seen as a given element of society, located primarily in politics, but as a term for analyzing a wide range of situations. Both diplomacy and the imperial cult were ways of constructing the emperor, and religious language was used in both contexts. Religion is not simply a gloss on politics.

      The significance of the imperial cult is dependent on its relationship not only to an autonomous religious system, but also to the political system. There might indeed have been no autonomous political system. As Geertz has shown, the state of nineteenth-century Bali was minimally concerned with administration, which was carried out at the village level, and devoted its energies to elaborate dramaturgical performances. Geertz used this example as the basis for rethinking the relationship between the "dignified" (or ritual) and the "efficient" (or practical) aspects of the state. He argues that it is a misconception to imagine that "the office of the dignified parts is to serve the efficient, that they are artifices, more or less cunning, more or less illusional, designed to facilitate the prosier aims of power. " 66  In his view "power served pomp, not pomp power .... The dramas of the theater state, mimetic of themselves, were, the end, neither illusions nor lies, neither sleight of hand nor make-believe. They were what there •was. 67  The problem is quite different in societies, like that of the Roman empire, which had an autonomous political and administrative system. Here it is obviously implausible, if not false, to conclude that rituals are all there was. How then are we to understand the relationship between the dignified and the efficient aspects of the state?

      Irrespective of theories about the ultimate springs of religious representations the significance of ritual has often been seen solely in terms of its practical consequences. Some have felt that the most important function of royal rituals is the preservation of the king's rule.

      Ritual has also been examined for its more general consequences or functions. The divinization of the Roman emperor has been seen to "function as the legitimation of rule." 68 But functionalist analysis typically fails to examine the conceptual elements of the ritual and leaps to the "obvious" conclusion, as if the actors' perceptions were irrelevant. Rituals are often felt to be "mere" rituals, a "symbolic" aspect of the "real" state, a form of flummery which can safely be left in the care of certain specialists. Such a distinction between the "real" and the "symbolic" wrongly presupposes that the "real," actual imperial rule, is unproblematic. But, as Geertz put it, "the real is as imagined as the imaginary. " 69

     This suggests that the terms of the question about the relationship between the dignified and the efficient aspects of the state need rethinking. The terms imply that the efficient aspects are what really count. The political apparatus, the administrative machine, the system of taxation are the fundamental parts of the state. The officials of the state possess political power; if their authority is questioned, they can support their power with force. If one takes this view of the efficient aspects of the state, the imperial cult will necessarily be seen simply as a response to the given phenomenon of political power. One might be tempted to say that it functioned as an accommodation of power and attempted to mystify political reality.

     The notion of power as a possession of political leaders is however, highly questionable. There are objections at two different levels. Firstly, it is surely wrong, as is usually done in historical studies, to treat power in realist terms as a simple datum. Scholars in different fields have shown that this notion of power needs reformulating. As Foucault argues, "Clearly it is necessary_ to be a nominalist: power is not an institution, a structure, or a certain force with which certain people are endowed; it is the name given to a complex strategic situation in a given society." 70  The argument that power is to be seen as a concept which analyzes relationships is presented more fully by political scientists. 71  Taking for granted that power is relational, they argue that a power relationship between A and B exists when B complies with A’s wishes on a matter where there is conflict of values or plans as a result of calculation of the consequences of non-compliance. That is, a power relationship is rational and compliant. It is easy to see how this view could be applied to the political power relationship between the Roman emperor and his Greek subjects. But is it not true that this power relationship rested ultimately on force. The emperor could execute rebellious subjects by judicial process, or he could send in the army. Force is, however, a very different concept from power. It applies to a situation when B is not compliant; it is non-rational. What justification can there be for assuming that force is what underpins power? The cities of the province of Asia, where there was no legion stationed, were not forced to obey the emperor from fear of his deployment of violence. That is, power was not a possession of the emperor, wielded over his subjects and supported ultimately by force; power is a term for analyzing complex strategic situations.

      The second-level objection to the conventional view of power is that power does not necessarily reside primarily in politics, or the "efficient" aspect of the state. If power is taken as an analytical term, it makes it easier to see that there are manifold relations of power which pervade and constitute society. Religion just as much as politics is concerned with power. In other words, there is no reason to privilege politics over the imperial cult.

      Furthermore, the constitution of these relations of power requires analysis. Diplomacy, a major element of politics in the Roman period, is often seen as essentially practical, or "efficient," a given, empirical reality requiring no further explanation. But diplomacy is surely not a simple fact, but a contingent social construct'. The endless embassies from cities to emperors need to be seen as one way of creating and defining a relationship between subject and ruler. The imperial cult was another way by which the emperor was constructed. 72 The "efficient" is no less a construct than the "dignified"; the "dignified" no less an expression of power than the "efficient."

      How, though, do these two means of constructing the emperor relate? The rationalist bias with which we are trained to interpret political events leads us to suppose that diplomacy was quite separate from the imperial cult, being based on empirical considerations. But, as has been argued of modern politics, "political beliefs and perceptions are very largely not based upon empirical observations or, indeed, upon information at all." 73 It would be mistaken to imagine that diplomacy, and the imperial cult operated in entirely separate spheres. We have already seen that the linguistic and iconographic classifications of imperial statues were not bounded by ritual contexts (Price, Rituals and Power, 179-80). The emperor was not transformed into a totally different being in ritual contexts. I want here to show that the religious language used in diplomatic contexts further weakens the conventional distinction between politics and the imperial cult.

      The imperial cult was often associated with diplomatic approaches to the emperor Offers of cult were sometimes made in association with requests concerning privileges and matters. 74  Ambassador to the emperor were frequently also imperial priests. For example, a Samian decree lists the members of an embassy to Augustus as "the priest of Emperor Caesar Sebastos son of god and of his son Gaius Caesar and of Marcus Agrippa, Gaius Julius Amynias ... and from the temple builders of Augustus, Menodorus son of Niceratus, and from the other temple builders Saphinios" and others. 75 We do not know in what terms they presented themselves to Augustus, but the city obviously appointed them because of their offices. Little evidence survives of the manner in which ambassadors addressed the emperor, but one Alexandrian embassy addressed Augustus as "unconquered hero," 76 and ambassadors from Mytilene showed no embarrassment in presenting divine honors to Augustus. The instructions given to them by the city for their speech survive in part; they were to address Augustus as one who had attained the eminence and power of the gods, and were to promise further divine honors which would "deify him even more." 77

      Divine language was used by the Greeks not only in their diplomatic approaches to the emperor but also in response to political actions by the emperor. Gaius made various alterations to the client kingdoms, which modern works describe in purely "factual" terms of administration. ("Rome lost nothing in surrendering the direct government of these districts." 78} This was not how the action was perceived by the Greeks. A contemporary Greek text reads: 79

      Since the new Sun Gaius Caesar Seb9stos Germanicus wanted to cast his own rays also on to the attendant kings of his empire, so that the greatness of his immortality should be in this matter too the more splendid, though the •kings, even if they racked their brains, were not able to find appropriate ways of repaying their benefactions to express their gratitude to such a great god (telikoutos theos); he re-established.the sons of Cotys, Rhoemetalces, Polemon and Cotys, who had been brought up with him and were his friends, to the kingdoms that rightly belonged to them from their fathers and ancestors. Reaping the abundant fruits of his immortal favor they were in this even greater than their predecessors: while they received thrones from their fathers, these men, as a result of the favour of Gaius Caesar, have.. become kings in the joint government of such great gods (eis sunarchian telikouton theon), and the favours of the gods differ from a purely human succession as much as day differs from night and the eternal from human nature.

      It is crucially important that the actions of Gaius and Hadrian are presented as the work of "such a great god." The first text also uses language more familiar and more acceptable to us about the restoration of the three men to their kingdom and their friendship with Gaius. But those scholars who screen out the more bizarre aspects of the language used by the participants commit the empiricist fallacy of imagining that social facts can be described in neutral, objective terms. We must not disguise the deliverance of the Greek conceptual system from our own.

      The importance of this interconnection between religious language and politics can be further demonstrated by an examination of the changes in that relationship and in the terms employed. In the Hellenistic period, when the amount of royal administration over Greek cities was relatively light and variable, the establishment of royal cults does not seem to have affected the terms of politics. The actions of kings towards cities were met by cults; for example, the benefactions of Antiochus III to Teos were followed by the erection of his statue beside that of Dionysus (Price, Rituals and Power, 31). But civic decrees do not describe the actions of the king in divine terms and do not elaborate the significance of the cults for the status of the king. By the time of Augustus the relationship of the honors to the political standing of the ruler had changed. The Mytileneans promised Augustus further honors which would deify him even more (seen. 79 above). Cults ceased to be simply responses to particular interventions by the ruler. The more elaborate and systematic nature of the imperial administration in contrast to that of Hellenistic kings was accompanied by a perception that the birthday of Augustus was simply equivalent to the beginning of all things (Price, Rituals and Power, 55).

      A Christianizing theory of religion which assumes that religion is essentially designed to provide guidance through the personal crises of life and to grant salvation into life everlasting imposes on the imperial cult a distinction between religion and politics. But a broader perspective suggests that religions need not provide answers to these particular questions, 80  and the imposition of the conventional distinction between religion and politics obscures the basic similarity between politics and religion: both are ways of systematically constructing power.

      Many societies have the problem of making sense of an otherwise incomprehensible intrusion of authority into their world. 81 The Greeks were faced with the with the rule first of Hellenistic kings and then of Roman emperors which was not completely alien, but which did not relate to the traditions of the  self-governing cities. They attempted to evoke an answer by focusing the problem in ritual. Using their traditional symbolic system they represented the emperor to themselves in the familiar terms of divine power. The imperial cult, like the cults of the traditional gods, created a relationship of power between subject and ruler. It also enhanced the dominance of  local elites over the populace, of cities over other cities, and of  Greek over indigenous cultures. That is, the cult was a major part of the web of power that formed the fabric of society.

      The imperial cult stabilized the religious order of the world. The system of ritual was carefully structured; the symbolism evoked a picture of the relationship between the emperor and the gods. The ritual was also structuring; it imposed a definition of the world. 82  The imperial cult, along with politics and diplomacy, constructed the reality of  the Roman empire.

Footnotes:

Ed. note: The notes to these excerpts from price do not attempt to reproduce fully the complex references and documentation m Rituals and Power. At points the reader is referred to Price's full discussion. References to "Catalogue ... " are to Rituals and Power. "A Catalogue of Imperial Temples ,and Shrines in Asia Minor," pp. 249-74. '

1. Nicolaus of Damascus, FGH 90 F 125. The Latin "Augustus" was a title, implying divine favor given to, the first emperor  whom  we  call Augustus, and employed by his successors  Sebastos is the Greek equivalent, but has a stronger association with the display of religious reverence (eusebeia) to the emperor. For other literary references to the cult see Philo, Legattoi 149-51, and Lucian, Apologia 13.

2. See M. Bloch, Les rois thaumaturges (Strasbourg: Librairie Istra, 1924) on the  royal touch, and on insignia, the useful introductory pieces by P. E. Schramm, Kaiser,  Konige und Piipste I (Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1968), 30-58 and IV 2 (1971), 682-701.

3. Clifford Geertz, "Religion as a Cultural System," in The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books, 1973), 97.

4. S. Lukes, Individualism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973), 110-22, analyzes the problem.

5. Cf. Mary Douglas's distinction between front-stage and back-stage bias (Implicit Meanings [London: Routledge, 1975], 120).

6. See, e.g., the survey by P. Burke, "The history of mentalities in Great Britain," Tijdschrift voor Geschiedenis 93 (1980): 529. For a philosophical defense inspired by Habermas, see C. Taylor, "Interpretation and the sciences of man," Review of Metaphysics 25 (1971):3.

7. Legitimate secular honors to rulers were termed proskynesis in Greek and adoratio in Latin, while religious honors were called /atreia and cultus. See K. M. Setton, Christian Attitude towards the Emperor in the Fourth Century (New York: Columbia University Press, 1941 ), 202-11.

8. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz, Continuity and Change in Roman Religion (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979), 78.

9. L. R. Taylor, The Divinity of the Roman Emperor (Middletown: American Philological Association, 1931), 35, 237, 238. Cf. D. Fishwick, "The Development of Provincial Ruler Worship in the Western Roman Empire," ANRW 2.16.2 (1978): 1253, who concludes: "The real significance of the worship of the Roman emperor, particularly in its provincial application, lies not in the realm of religion at all but in a far different field: that of practical government, wherein lay the historic destiny of the Roman people."

10. K. Latte, Romische Religionsgeschichte 1 (Munich: Beck, 1960), 312-26, a "Loyalitatsreligion."

11. A. D. Nock, CAH 10 (1934): 481-82, though he recognized that there was
hardly an equivalent ancient distinction, Essays on Religion and the Ancient World, ed. Z. Stewart, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1972), 241.

12. M. P. Nilsson, Greek Piety (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), 178.

13. Keith Hopkins, Conquerors and Slaves (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,1978), 208-9.

14. Glen W. Bowersock, Augustus and the Greek World (Oxford: Clarendon, 1965),112.

15. S. Weinstock, Divus Julius (Oxford: Clarendon, 1971), 401-7, places the significant change earlier with the honors offered Julius Caesar in his lifetime and those promoted by his followers after his death. But there is little evidence from the Greek world datable before the triumph of Augustus, and many cults may have been founded only after it became clear that Augustus was eager to promote the cult of his father.

16. U. Laffi, "Le iscizioni relative all'introduzione nel 9 A.C. de! nuovo calendario della provincia d'Asia, SCO 16 (1967): 5-98.

17. Translation adapted from Roman Civilization, ed. N. Lewis, M. Reinhold, 2 vols. (New York: Harper & Row, 1955), 2:64.

18. Translation adapted from Ancient Roman Statutes, ed. A. C. Johnson, P. R. Coleman-Norton, F. C. Bourne (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1961), 119.

19. I. Olympia 53. For Coan provenance see L. Robert, Hellenica II (1946), 146 n. 2, and BCH 102 (1978): 401.

20. OGIS 456 = IGR IV 39. society.

21. For additional documents see J. H. Oliver, "Julia Domna as Athena Polias," in Athenian Studies Ferguson (HSCP Supp. I, 1940), 521 (with Hesperia [1941] 84, no. 36 and [1971] 200, no. 53); TAM II 549 = SEG XX.VIII 1227 (Tloan decree referring to Lycian decision); Charitonides no. 14 with BE (1970): 422 (Mytilene).

22. IGR IV 947 and 948 with Robert, BCH 57 (1933): 518-33 = OMS I 486-501 (Chios).

23. Cat. nos. 53, 67, 74, 126; Milet I 2, 4.

24. F. Geiger, De sacerdotibus Augustorum manicipalibus (Diss. Phil. Halle XXIII, 1913), 45-46, on civic priests; A. Stein, "Zur sozialen Stellung der provinzialen Oberpriester," in Epitymbion H. Swoboda dargebracht (1927), 300, and J. M. I. West, "Asiarchs" (unpublished B.Litt. Oxford, 1975), on provincial priests as the cream of society. Also M. Rossner, "Asiarchen und Archiereis Asias," Studii clasice 16 (1974):, 101-42.

25. IGR ill 582 =TAM II 175 (Sidyma); SEG XXVII 938 (Tlos).

26. IGR IV 1302 = I. Kyme 19; BGU III 913 (Myra); I. Priene 222; P. Turner 22 (Side). Cf. Epictetus I 19, 26-29, and chap. 4, p. 84 on villages, and R. Mellor, THEA l HROME (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1975), 182-87, on priests of Roma.

27. E.g., Geiger, De sacerdotibus, 45-46.

28. Ibid., 58-59.

29. I. Ephesos III 710.

30. IG V 2, 515. Similarly the founder of the Caesarea at Epidaurus became their first agonothete, IG IV 12 652.

31. L. Robertj "La titulature de Nicee et de Nicomedie: la gloire et la haine," HSCP 81 (1977). See S. R. F. Price, Rituals and Power: The Roman Imperial Cult in Asia Minor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), chap. 5, for the other side of the coin.

32. Geertz, Interpretation of Cultures, 112.

33. I. Ephesos Ia 18b, 11-17 (translation adapted from Johnson et al., Ancient Roman Statutes, no. 171).

34. Nock, Essays on Religion, 42-43, on Sebastan gods.

35. Robert, Hellenica_ VI t1948), 43-48, 73-74; Archaiologike Ephemeris (1969), 49-58; Mellor, THEA HROME, 176-80, on Romaea. Cf. Price, Rituals and Power, 212. For the transience of imperial civic titles see Robert, Hellenica II (1946), 76-79, and Archaiologike Ephemeris (1977), 217.

36. Imperial authorization of expenditure or of a change in rank may explain some, Robert, Hellenica XI-XII (1960), 350-68, on Asclepieia Antoninea at Ancyra and Castabala 92 on Peraseia Sebasta.

37. Caesarea and Isthmia at Corinth, Robert, Archaiologike Ephemeris (1969), 49-58.

38. Robert, Laodicee du Lycos: Le Nymphee, ed. J. Des Gagniers et al. (1969), 286, and Etudes Anatoliennes (1937): 35 on Dionysia Caesarea at Teos.

39. Milet I 3, 134 = LSAM 53; IGR IV 98 (Mytilene).

40. J. H. Oliver, The Sacred Gerusia, Hesperia Suppl. VI (Baltimore: American School of Classical Studies at Athens, 1941), 3 =I. Ephesos Ia 27, lines 48-56, 202-14, 554-60.

41. IGR IV 654 =MAMA VI 265 (Acmonia); IGR IV 579, 584 (Aezani); IGR III 778 = OGIS 567,>IGR III 780 = SEG XVII 579 (Attalea); Price, Rituals and Power, chap. 3, n. 33,(Chios); IGR III 382 (Selge). See also IGR UL pp. 659-60.

42. IGR IV 850 with Robert, Laodicee, 285.

43. L. Moretti, "Koina Asias," RFIC 82 (1954): 276, at Cyzicus, Ephesus, Laodicea, Pergamum, Philadelphia, Sardis, Smyrna and Tralles.

44. I. Ephesos IV 1393; Price, Rituals and Power, chap. 3 n. 15; IGR IV 1666 = I. Ephesos VII I, 3245 (near Tire); I. Ephesos Ia 26.

45. E. Schiirer, "Zu II Mace. 6, 7 (monatliche Geburtstagfeier)," ZNW 2 (1901): 48; Chr. Habicht, Gottmenchtum und griechische Stadte, 2nd ed. (Munich: Beck, 1970), 156. Also rarely, daily cult, Price, Rituals and Power, 228.

46. SEG XIII 258, 39-40 (Gytheum); IGR III 739 =TAM II 905 ix 951£. (Rhodiapolis); OGIS 524 = IGR IV 1257 (Thyatira); Robert, Etudes Anatoliennes, 549-50 (Lagina, Panamara). The Pergamene choir had a series of celebrations throughout the year (IGR IV 353).

47. Robert, Hellenica II (1946), 59. Aristides (Or. LI [Keil] 11 and 16) refers to a sacred month of the temple at Cyzicus, which could be the imperial temple there.

48. IGR IV 1608c = I. Ephesos VII 2, 3801, restored.

49. K. Scott, "Greek and Roman honorific months," YCS 2 (1931): 201-78. Cf.
R. Merkelbach, "Die ephesischen Monate in der Kaiserzeit," ZPE 36 (1979): 157-62.

5O. A. E. Samuel, Greek and Roman Chronology (Munich: Beck, 1972), 174-76, 181-82, 186-87.

51. L. Robert, Les gladiateurs dans l'Orient grec (Paris: Champion, 1940), 280-81.

52. IGR IV 336 = AJ 73, 30; IGR IV 1431 (Smyrna).

53. Alter von Pergamon VIII (1898ff), 164-65. See in general L. Robert, Monnaies antiques en Troade (Geneva: Droz, 1966), 25-30.

54. JGR IV 584 (Aezani), 993 (Samos), 1248 (Thyatira). BCH 10 (1886): 416, no. 25,and I. Ephesos ill 724. Cf. Robert, Gnomon 35 (1963): 68-69.

55. Robert, AJP 100 (1979): 161-62.

56. See generally H. Kuper, "The language of sites in the politics of space," American Anthropologist 74 (1972): 411-15; e.g., on the Berber house: P. Bourdieu, Algeria 1960 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969), 133-53.

57. J. P. Vemant, "Espace' et organisation politique en Grece ancienne," in Myth and Thought among the Greeks (London, Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983), 212-34.

58. The temple outside Laodicea Combusta (Cat. no. 115) may have been on an imperial estate but the town itself seems not to have been strongly nucleated. There is also an anomalous temple a few minutes outside Hyllarima (Cat. no. 67), as well as other non-imperial sanctuaries.

59. The well-known "temple of Hadrian" at Ephesus (Cat. no. 32), which is tucked away on one side of the main street, its ground plan ignominiously determined by the baths behind, is not a counter-example; see Price, Rituals and Power, 149-50.

60. They were also dedicated to the emperor, e.g., SEG XV 454 = IGBulg IV 2057 (Pautalia).

61. SEG XIV 702 = LSCG Supp. 111 (Tymnus) and OGIS 511 = IGR IV 580 (Aezani). Cf. R. Martin, Recherches sur l'agora grecque (Paris: E. de Boccard, 1951), 497-98.

62. See now K. Tuchelt, "Zurn Problem 'Kaisareion-Sebasteion,'" 1st. Mitt. 31 (1981):167-86.

63. I. Ephesos II 212 with L. Robert, "Sur des inscriptions d'Ephese, 6. Lettres imperiales a Ephese," Rev. Phil. 41 (1967): 44-64. Livia had also been important, e.g., Fergus Millar, The Emperor in the Roman World (London: Duckworth, 1977), 431-32.

64. Philologus 80 (1925): 339, with Rh. M. 112 (1969): 48-53.

65. A. I. Richards, "Keeping the King Divine," in Proceedings of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1968): 23; R. E. Bradbury, Benin Studies (London and New York: Published for the International African Institute by Oxford University Press, 1973), 74- 75, "the key problem of Benin polity- the relationship between political kingship and divine kingship." See more generally Geertz, Interpretation of Cultures, 122-27.

66. Clifford Geertz, Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth-Century Bali (Princeton:Princeton University Press, 1980), 122.

67. Ibid., 13, 136.

68. H. Gesche, "Die Divinisierung der riimischen Kaiser in ihrer Funktion als Herrschaftslegitimation," Chiron 8 (1978): 377.

69. Geertz, Negara, 136.

70. M. Foucault, The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978). See further Power/Knowledge (New York: Pantheon, 1980).

71. P. Bacarach, M. S. Baratz, Power and Poverty (New York: Oxford University Press, 197.0), :o which S. Lukes, Power: A Radical View (London: Macmillan, 1974), does not do justice. See also M. A. Crenson, The Un-Politics of Air Pollution (Baltimore: Johns Hopkms Univers1ty Press, 1971), chap. 1, for a method of studying non-decisions.

72. I borrow the term "construction" from (e.g.) P. L. Berger, T. Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality (New York: Doubleday, 1966).

73. Murray J. Edelman, Politics as Symbolic Action (New York: Academic Press, 1971), 31.

74. See, for evidence, Millar, The Emperor in the Roman World, 492, 537, 542-44 and 375-463 on embassies.

75. Ath. Mitt. 75 (1960): 70, no. 1 = P. Herrmann, Der romische Kaisereid (Gioittingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1968), 125, no. 6. Cf. E. L. Bowie, YCS 27 (1982): 35, and Price, Rituals and Power, 85-86.

76. P. Oxy. 3020 col. ii.

77. IGR IV 39 = OGIS 456 .. I infer the nature of this part of the text from the fact that it is in indirect speech. The language of petitions may also have been strongly religious, though the texts of the actual ,petitions are rarely preserved (and not before the second century). See a decree from Cos (Price, Rituals and Power, chap. 3, n. 8) and the use of theios (ibid., 246).

78. J. P. V. D. Balsdon, The Emperor Gaius (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934), 200-203.

79. IGR IV 145 = Syll.3 798 (Cyzicus). Cf. also the Neronian freeing of Greece (Syll.3 814).

80. Cf. Geertz, Interpretation of Cultures, and P. L. Berger, The Social Reality of Religion (London: Faber, 1969).

81. Kenelm 0. L. Burridge, New Heaven, New Earth (Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1969), is excellent on millenarian cults and on religion and power in general. Cf. also L. Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson, 1957).

82. P. Bburdieu, "Sur le pouvoir symbolique," Annales (ESC) 32 (1977): 405 (translated in Critique of Anthropology 13-14 (1979]: 77).Embed