7 ContributorsHoly Smoke Cypher 2021 Lyrics[Intro: DJ Mykael V]
Ayy, listen, we 'bout to start this joint up
So I need y'all to get crazy
Whenever they say somethin' crazy, you go in
Yo, Dyl, you ready?

[Verse 1: nobigdyl.]
Welcome to the festival, leave the track braindead
The beat is now a vegetable, a radish
The way that I be teachin' all these lessons, though, erratic
It's fascinatin', and I know all my agitators that been playin' for a break
Are gettin' pretty aggravated, I give 'em lacerations
You know rappers gotta put a little swagger on it
We all cap, it's just the one you got say MAGA on it
That's a red flag, I'm fightin' jet lag, I'm nappin' on 'em
Flow colder than Patagonia, iller than
If both kids got COVID and then you add pneumonia
I got demons tryna lead me wit' a bad aroma
You don't get 'em off your back, they put a saddle on ya
All that's done inside the dark is gonna come to light
Skeletons in your closet, they gonna tattle on ya
That's why I wear confession like a badge of honor
Fill the pen and pad with prophecy, and then I sat it on ya

[Verse 2: Swaizy & DJ Mykael V]
Okay, uh
It ain't a cypher, it's a Super Smash the way that we decoded
Chillin' with the brodies, homie, know you takin' notice
Like Chernobyl, every time I spit it, they only hear explosions
808 can break your neck, the speakers get imploded
Holy water in the smoke machine to get the holy smoke and
It ain't foggy, joint is crystal clear the way I stay devoted
Like the ten, my top-down crew, yeah, I really own it
Keep the circle of trust, no time to buffer, keep it loadin'
Uh, "Swaizy ain't a rapper, he got no rhymes"
Man, stop lyin', need your Dr. Phil, I'll catch you outside
On momma, y'all hella different than what I see online
The twenty-four karat watch, I'm not complacent to tell time
Like a Funko Pop, the way that some of y'all got no brain
No way, like Peter, walked on water at close range
It's okay, believin' God forever and always
Ain't Survivor, 'cause the Tribal Council voted me on stage, huh
It ain't Survivor, 'cause the Tribal Council voted me on stage, huh (Ayo, ayo!)
East! East! (Ayo, ayo!)
Who next? Who next? (Ayy)
You might also like[Verse 3: Mogli the Iceburg]
One, one
Let me catch this one, one time
Uh-huh, uh-huh
Uh-huh, uh-huh
Yeah, indie tribe., boy, we never die like the jellyfish
We multiplyin' like you stuck us in a Petri dish
Someone sneezed and now it's out of control
I know the music is contagious, but it's good for the soul, ayo
They say the flow is disrespectful, momma grab the belt
That's why you never see me drift, like continental shelves
That's why I built my house on rock, not sand
A storm of grain for the fam and now things are goin' as planned, uh-huh
Assassinate the beat like origins or syndicate
My windows down, so you can see me when I'm in the whip
Iceburg stay colder than an Inuit
You know the tribe save lives like a tourniquet

[Interlude: DJ Mykael V]
Wow, wow

[Verse 4: Battz & DJ Mykael V]
Aight, look, ayy
All these junkies, man, they want is a chain
But not even realizin' they incessant with chain
And that's a shame, dang, 'that you don't see no bigger picture
No you don't get it now, but I am here to make it clearer
Keep blamin' everybody, but just look up in that mirror
You don't even realize that your end is gettin' nearer
You want me, a sinner, at the table, havin' dinner?
You be claimin' you a killer like there ain't nobody iller
But we got ghettos, that is modern day segregation
You saw that I'm gettin' fed through like Hov at kid dedication
Somehow this Satan knowledge, He causin' your separation
Criminal every move and causin' your temptations, ayy
Only bow down to G-O-D
Take my happiness away and I'm like, "Negro, please!"
And I'ma teach my sisters right, ain't no Cardi B's
And I'ma teach my son respect, ain't no Bill Cosby's
Look, from ? I was confidence
Everybody know this off the top and I'ma never stop
And they just makin' all these moves like pencil rock to my God
Everybody in my lane, they facades, man, it's Battz, for real
(Wow, wow, wow, wow!)
605 in the building!
Wow
[Verse 5: Jon Keith]
Y'all cool? Y'all ready?
Uh, oh baby
Onto higher goals, yeah, it's cold and crazy
They ain't gon' give me roses 'til I'm pushin' up daisies
So Christ comes free, but you niggas gon' pay me, uh-uh
I'm top two, and I'm not two
Ask how I make it look easy, I'm not you
They tellin' me that if it's smoke, it's a fire
I said, he talkin' smoke, then he smokin'
Off a bean, try floatin', the top's open
No coastin', 'less he talkin' 'bout West Coast ish
How you talkin' drip but don't live by the ocean?
I've been on my bag, on the waves like Moses
Uh, livin' water, that's tasty
Eyes on the throne praise 'Hovah, no JAY-Z
Some shots hard, but the nerves don't phase me
He don't see the bigger picture, he Lil Baby, aw
Ta-da, shots sawed off
Wonder why the kids like me? 'Cause I'm Popeye
I ain't never heard of wipey 'til I caca
I ain't really come to sightsee, I came to pop off

[Interlude: DJ Mykael V]
A legend, a legend in the building!
[Verse 6: J. Monty]
Alright
Uh, I don't flock, I take different path, I pray to the Lord
You a mop, please don't miss your bath, you stay on the shore
Watch your teeth, if you mention me, might just come up missin'
I pray peace to my enemy, y'all know my intention
Paragraph just to lift you, no parenthetical, I'm charismatic with the pencil
I'm tearin' tags off the rental, no paramedical, they scared to ask about my mental
I follow the Nazarene, Him I cherish
It'll be a tragedy, what, if you perish
Even though I flee the po-po and beat your door, release the .44
I seen Jehov' redeem my whole soul, I speak to those who need to know Him, fiendin' for 'em
I'll CTRL-Alt-Delete your whole flow, keep ignorin', keep sleepin' on me
I'ma ready, reaper, keep 'em- hold on, hold on, hold on, hold on
Dyllie, I came with a stick
If they run up, they get hit, grrah
Christian, but still keep a blick
I rode this beat into orbit, yeah!

[Verse 7: Aklesso & DJ Mykael V]
Ayy, let me talk to the fooly, ayy, uh
All I ever wanted is a Rollie and some chains, uh
Then I double backed when I went and found my faith, uh
She was like, "'Klesso, why you gon' move that way?", uh
I done moved real careful, 'cause them steppers do not play
Had to go and make some' shake, they had Dracos where I stay, uh
Ridin' through my city, better go and say your grace
Was some shottas in my city on some Zo-zu, get it done
Keep my baby rockin' Fendi so she fresh when they will come, uh
When he comin', tell me where he go
'Bout to hop in it, dive in it, Geronimo, uh
When I get married, they gon' say I'm in a boat, uh
Floatin' to this beat 'cause you know I'm gon' float, uh
It's off the top, and I don't ever stop
Homie's tryna see me like, "Man, when you drop?" Uh
I just dropped a crazy album
It's M-O-B-N for you and in the fountain, uh
And I'm blessed, uh, lookin' never stressed, uh
I'm with nobigdyl., you know the rest
​indie tribe., baby, and we came to shut it down
You saw me playin' basketball, I had to put it- down!
Wow, wow

[Verse 8: Rob Nor & DJ Mykael V]
Sheesh
Ayy, shout-out my wife
My wife in the building, ugh
Wifed up, wifed up
This for Cleveland, you heard? Ayy, check
Uh
Gospel ambition givin' me passion
Hunger of a glutton can't stomach only rations
Happens when you taste and see His glory by a fraction
Abstinence to smoke and sex, it don't bring satisfaction
Passin' by those with an appetite for hope
Mouths start to foam, he was shakin' offa dope
My bones shiver, lips quiver, mercy of a sick sinner
November, we ran it, agenda, he couldn't - aah!
But I'ma bring it back, though
They was like "Dang, Robbie hittin' with a backstroke"
Swimmin' through the beat and I'm swimmin' through defeat
They was like "If he ten toes, he standin' on his feet"
I will not retreat, this is off the dome if you think you got IT beat
I was like, bang, I'ma sit in the seat
That's the passenger, I'ma come up and blast at ya
But I'm not like that, I'ma have to get it, God, You know I fight back
That's realEmbed